# Module 1: React Concepts and Setup

## 1. What is React?

- React is a JS library (not a framework) for building component-based single page applications in JavaScript.
- It was created by Facebook in 2013.
- Resources: https://reactjs.org

## 2. What is a Single Page Application and the Virtual DOM?

- SPA or Single Page Architecture is a website design approach where each new page's content is served not from loading new HTML pages but generated dynamically with JavaScript's ability to manipulate the DOM elements on the existing page itself.
- SPA benefits and drawbacks
  - Benefits
    - Allows users to continue consuming and interacting with the page while new elements are being updated or fetched, and can result in much faster interactions
    - HTML5 History API allows us to alter the page's URL without reloading the page.
  - Drawbacks
    - Accessibility
    - SEO Rankings
    - If your content is purely static, it can worsen initial load times.
- The Virtual DOM
  - The virtual dom is a virtual representation of the UI kept in memory and synced with the real DOM by a library such as ReactDOM. The process is called reconciliation.
- How does it work?
  - You tell React what state you want the UI to be in, and it makes sure the DOM matches that state. This abstracts out attribute manipulation, event handling, and manual DOM updated that you would otherwise have to do.

## 3. Using create-react-app

- Check your node version with the following command. It should be 8.10 or higher.
  > node -v
- Confirm your npm version with the folowing command. It should be 5.6 or higher.
  > npm -v
- If there is a version mismatch or if you do not have npm or node installed, head to the following resource to download node.
  > https://nodejs.org/en/download/
  >
  > nvm for version management: https://github.com/nvm-sh/nvm

---

- Once the environment is setup, run the following command to generate a project using create-react-app: (note the difference between npx and npm)
  > npx create-react-app [name of the project]
- Run the following commands to change directory into your project and start the application:
  > cd [project directory]
  >
  > npm start

## 4. Touring a create-react-app project

- package.json
  - lists our dependencies
  - lists our Scripts
    - start, test are aliases for "npm run [script]"
  - run the build script to show the target folder
- node_modules
  - houses our dependency files
- public
  - houses our public assets
- src
  - houses our source code
- gitignore
  - auto-generated by create-react-app
- build
  - after running the command "npm run build" a folder called build is created with our self-contained application.

## 5. Brief Discussion of ReactDOM.render and React.createElement

- ReactDOM takes two arguments
  - The element to render.
  - The location to add the element to in the DOM.
- React.createElement("h1", { style: { color : "blue"}}, "Hello World from React")

## 6. Suggested Tools and Extensions

- React Dev Tools
  - Firefox
  - Chrome
